you don't have to be a supermassive
Marvel lid to understand this video
telling me so I saw the New Avengers
movie at the weekend
infinity war loved it obviously cuz I'm
doing this video on it now
for those of you haven't seen it there
are some mild spoilers ahead in case you
want to wait so did you know that sixty
symbols is actually in the Marvel comic
book universe so there's this one pain
of an x-men comic back from like 2015
where they have like an iPad on the
table and it's clearly on YouTube and
down the side is like numberphile and
sixty symbols and I'm just like this
video is about the Marvel Universe and
the idea that someone in the Marvel
Universe could be watching my video
about the Marvel Universe like it's so
matter so in the movie there is a scene
where some of the characters travel to a
neutron star and this neutron star is
being used as a weapons Forge I was
really intrigued by this idea of whether
you could use the energy from a neutron
star to melt metal are you to melt it
down and turn it into a weapon so in the
scene the characters sort of start up
this neutron star they have to reawaken
it apparently okay so that aside and
what they have to do is once they really
can did they have to sort of like get
the energy from the neutron star onto
this bit of metal that they are trying
to melt and some mechanism breaks down
and some great that needs to be open is
shut and so one of the characters Thor
says okay I'll hold it open so he takes
the brunt this energy from the neutron
stars great he holds this great open
long enough so that the metal can melt
and he asks how long do I have to open
the grate for and the other character
says I don't know about a minute and I
thought would it really take a minute to
melt metal with the neutron star so a
neutron star is the core of a collapsed
star so a star that's gone supernova
they tend to be around ten kilometers
across and sort of between about one and
a half and three times the mass of the
Sun so we're talking like the size of a
city with three suns in it can we
actually work out whether the energy we
get off a neutron star is enough to melt
metal into a new weapon of some form and
how long would it take to do that we're
first gonna have to know how much energy
the neutron star is giving off this is
very well modelled if you
the neutron star has a black body and so
we can use the stefan-boltzmann law to
do that so the stefan-boltzmann law said
the power given off by somebody which a
star is proportional to the temperature
of that body
so the temperature of our neutron star
to the power of 4 and I figured out I
had to break out the equations again
because everyone commented on how nice
my handwriting was last time and they
said it should be made into a font so I
was like I have to do this again give
the people what they want okay so
basically if this is proportional then
there's some sort of proportional
constant in here as well so instead we
can write this as this power is equal to
the stefan-boltzmann constant which I'm
going to represent with a Greek Sigma
that's not a six as a Sigma and the
temperature in atomic power 4 okay so
this power is basically the energy
radiated per area per unit time you'll
notice there's a time in there which is
good because they're trying to work out
how long it's gonna take this metal to
melt so we can write this basically as
energy over the area that the energy is
being beamed into and the time that it's
been beamed over favor time in there so
in time for melt and we have a
temperature of a neutron star great so
we need to know how much energy we need
to give the metal in order to take it
from say room temperature to its melting
point okay so again this has been very
well studied we know a lot about it and
it's all to do with the specific heat
capacity of a material the energy you
can put into material II is given by how
much mass of that material you have the
specific heat capacity which we
represent by C and then the change in
temperature so this is delta T so this
is a nice scientific way of saying the
change in something specific heat
capacities basically how easy or how
hard it is to heat something up so if
you think about when you're boiling
water on a harbor or stove presumably
the pan that you're heating it in is
metal and then you've got the water in
the middle so the pan on the outside
actually gets very hot very quickly with
the direct heat that's on it but the
water takes much longer to eat up okay
so metal basically has a much lower heat
capacity than something like water which
has a much higher heat capacity so
basically says you have to put more
energy in to increase the temperature of
something we need to work out how much
energy we need to put in to that metal
in order to melt it
and then that's how much energy we need
from the neutron star and then we can
work out over what time the neutron star
would that it would give that out and
therefore how long it would take the
metal to mount the time that it would
take to melt the metal is the mass of
the metal times by the specific heat
capacity of the metal times by the
temperature that you need to increase
the metal temperature by all divided by
area of metal that you're heating this
Boltzmann constant Sigma and the
temperature of the neutron star to the
power of 4 nice simple equation from
some nice simple thermodynamics and it
will help us work out how long it would
actually take for you to melt some metal
in a neutron star Forge now we need to
figure out some properties of the
neutron star and some properties of the
metal that Thor is melting in the film
to figure out if we could actually do
this I looked up what metal though
always why are you laughing at me I
looked up what Thor's weapon is made out
of and Marvel tells us that it is made
out of a metal called guru and it is a
god-like metal and that is all the
information they give you I was like
Marvel why aren't you telling me it's
melting temperature oh it's specific
heat capacity I need to know these
things we can assume some things ok so
the first thing I'm going to assume is
that it has a really high melting point
because it takes quite a while he's
about a minute in the film to melt these
things I'm in assume that it has a
really high melting point so I looked up
you know metals what has the highest
melting point turns out his tungsten
tungsten has a melting point around
about 3700 Kelvin I also need to know
with my equation how much of the metal
that were heating so again I turned to
Marvel and was like how heavy is Thor's
weapon so unfortunate they don't quote
wait for his new weapon the one that
he's forging in the new in the new film
in an infinity war but they do quote his
old weapon his hammer they quote is 19
point one nine kilograms which seems
like to me but whatever and I'm gonna
assume that basically they're heating
about a meter squared ish of metal just
to mean that i'm was nice and simple
then we also need to know the
temperature of our neutron star so i
looked up a couple references that i
could find online and I found one that
basically said the you know typical
neutron star that's not
like fresh brand new formed but sort of
pretty early on in its life it's about
600,000 Kelvin so then we need to plug
all our numbers into our equation so
first of all we need our mass which we
know was nineteen point one nine
kilograms we needed our specific heat
capacity which was a hundred and thirty
joules per kilogram per Kelvin it's not
canceled our kilograms here and then the
change in temperature I mean they're in
space so they're probably not at room
temperature but again I'm going to
assume they're at room temperature and
I'm gonna say you know we need to go
from room temperature to the melting
point of tungsten which we've assumed is
the same melting point as this guru
which is about three thousand four
hundred Kelvin and then it's gonna be
all over the area which I said was about
a meter squared and I'll probably fine
and then we gotta times it by this
stefan boltzmann constant which is five
point six seven times ten to the minus
eight so it's a really small number and
then this temperature of the neutron
star which we said was six hundred
thousand to the power of four so if we
plug all those numbers in and calculate
it would you like to know how long it
would take to melt the metal with the
neutron star and now no ii not exactly a
minute as they say in the film I'm
assuming Marvel did this calculation and
I'm assuming they thought that a
nanosecond is too small we'll have to go
with a minute
so I thought what about if we worked
backwards from the minute that it takes
in the film to melt the metal we work
backwards to find out what's the
temperature of the neutron star that
they're using on this weapons Forge of
new devaglia
I think that's pronounced right I don't
know let's now define the properties of
this metal guru and you know if anyone
went for Marvel is watching I have
defined them to have a melting
temperature of about 25,000 Kelvin just
kind of you know typical temperature of
a lightning bolt and the specific heat
capacity of water okay and then if we
take our equation that we had before
this time of melts times by the mass and
stivi pasty and the change temperature
over all the area and the
stefan-boltzmann and this temperature of
neutron star we can rearrange this
equation again to give us the
temperature the neutron star and so if
you plug in those properties of area
that we had before and that the time for
melt should be about 60
Coons then you get a temperature from
the neutron star of about 8,700 Kelvin
so not 600,000 Kelvin but in neutron
stars once they're formed they form at
these really high temperatures of like a
million Kelvin and then they cool
throughout their lives so if we've taken
a measurement of how hot this neutron
star is at eight thousand seven hundred
Kelvin we can therefore work out how old
this neutron star is in terms of like
how long it has been cooling for to get
from 600,000 Kelvin to eight thousand
seven hundred Kelvin the way that it's
modeled how the neutron star cools is as
a blackbody again and so we're gonna use
the exact same equation that we had
before for the time of melting but
instead for the time that it takes the
neutron star to cool but instead we'll
be using the specific heat capacity of
the neutron star and the change in
temperature will be from six and 1000
Kelvin to this 8700 that we had before
okay so first of all I had to try and
find a specific heat capacity of a
neutron star which turns out is you know
very woolly amazingly enough it's very
difficult to measure how hard it is to
heat up a neutron star it would cool
down a neutron star and but there are a
couple measurements that I found in the
literature so I did find one in one
paper that said that specific heat
capacity was one times ten to the
twenty-nine joules per Kelvin so if we
plug all those numbers into the equation
that we had before and we assume that
our nation's leaders are is about ten
kilometers across then we get a time as
neutron star has been cooling for 46
million years which is entirely
plausible because you know the universe
is about 14 billion years old so you
know that's nothing in the history of
the universe but it's definitely sort of
lifetime of humans and gods in there and
especially so we know we can poke holes
in the whole scene but this nice little
bit of thermodynamics and school physics
really shows us that you know this could
actually be possible in a way to take
the energy from a neutron star at least
there would be enough energy
they're how you harness that energy and
how you sort of you know collimate it
down into a beam to get it to melt the
actual metal itself is another problem
for another day
but the idea is that the energy is there
at the neutron star if you would need it
do the exact opposite and that's what
quantum entanglement is Paul will
trapped in this parallel universe if
this entire universe was quantumly
entangled with our universe and anything
that will does in the parallel universe
has to be reflected in our universe as
well the particles have to do the exact